good evening from belmont university in
nashville tennessee i'm tom brokaw of
nbc news and welcome to the second
presidential debate sponsored by the
commission on presidential debates
tonight's debate is the only one with a
town hall format the gallup organization
shows 80 uncommitted voters from the
national area to be here with us tonight
and earlier today each of them gave me a
copy of their question for the
candidates from all these questions and
from tens of thousands submitted online
i have selected a long list of excellent
questions on domestic and foreign policy
neither the commission or the candidates
have seen the questions and although we
will be able to get to all of them
tonight we should have a wide-ranging
discussion one month before the election
each candidate will have two minutes to
respond to a common question and there
will be a one-minute follow-up the
audience here in the hall has agreed to
be polite and attentive no cheering or
outbursts those of you at home of course
are not so constrained the only
exception in the hall is right now as it
is my privilege to introduce the
candidates senator barack obama of
illinois and senator john mccain of
arizona gentlemen
gentlemen we want to get underway
immediately if we can since you last met
at ole miss 12 days ago the world has
changed a great deal and not for the
we still don't know where the bottom is
at this time as you might expect many of
the questions that we have from here in
the hall tonight and from online have to
do with the american economy and in fact
with global economic conditions i
understand that you flipped a coin and
senator obama you'll begin tonight and
we're gonna have our first question from
over here in section a from allen
schaefer allen with the economy on the
downturn and retired and older citizens
and workers losing their incomes what's
the fastest most positive solution to
bail these people out of the economic
room well allen thank you very much for
the question i want to first obviously
thank belmont university tom thank you
and to all of you are participating
tonight and those of you sent email
questions in i think everybody knows now
we are in the worst financial crisis
since the great depression
and a lot of you i think are worried
about your jobs your pensions your
retirement accounts your ability to send
your child or your grandchild to college
and i believe this is a final verdict on
the failed economic policies of last
eight years strongly promoted by
president bush and supported by senator
mccain that essentially said that we
should strip away regulations consumer
protections let the market run wild and
prosperity would rain down on all of us
it hasn't worked out that way and so now
we've got to take some decisive action
now step one was a rescue package that
was passed last week we've got to make
sure that works properly and that means
strong oversight making sure that
investors taxpayers are getting their
money back and treated as investors it
means that we are cracking down on ceos
and making sure that they're not getting
bonuses or golden parachutes as a
consequence of this package and in fact
we just found out that aig a company
they got to bail out just a week after
they got help
went on a $400,000 junket and i tell you
what the treasury should demand that
money back and those executives should
be fired but that's only step one the
middle class need a rescue package and
that means tax cuts for the middle class
it means help for homeowners so that
they can stay in their homes it means
that we are helping state and local
governments set up road projects and
bridge projects that keep people in
their jobs and then long term we've got
to fix our health care system we've got
to fix our energy system that is putting
such an enormous burden on families so
you need somebody working for you and
you've got to have somebody in
washington who's thinking about the
middle class and not just those who can
afford to hire lobbyists senator mccain
well thank you tom thank you belmont
university and senator obama it's good
to be with you at a town-hall meeting
and alan thank you for your question you
go to the heart of america's worries
tonight americans are angry they're
upset and they're a little fearful it's
our job to fix the problem
now i have a plan to fix this problem
and it's got to do with energy
independence we've got to stop sending
700 billion dollars a year to countries
that don't want to spray like us very
much we have to keep americans taxes low
all americans taxes low let's not raise
taxes on anybody today we obviously have
to stop the spending spree that's going
on in washington do you know that we've
laid a 10 trillion dollar debt on these
young americans who are who are here
with us tonight 500 billion of it we owe
to china we've got to have a package of
reforms and it's got to lead to reform
prosperity and peace in the world and i
think that this problem has become so
severe as you know that we're going to
have to do something about home values
you know that home values of retirees
continues to decline and people are no
longer able to afford their mortgage
payments as president united states alan
i would order the secretary of the
treasury to immediately buy up the bad
home loan mortgages in america and
renegotiate at the new value of those
homes at the diminished value of those
homes and let people make
those be able to make those payments and
stay in their homes is it expensive yes
but we all know my friends until we
stabilize home values in america we're
never going to start turning around and
creating jobs and fixing our economy and
we've got to give some trust and
confidence back to america i know how to
do that my friends and it's my proposal
it's not senator obama's proposal it's
not president bush's proposal but i know
how to get america working again restore
our economy and take care of working
americans thank you senator we have a 1
minute for a discussion here obviously
the powers of the treasury secretary
have been greatly expanded the most
powerful officer in the cabinet now hank
paulson says he won't stay on who do you
have in mind to a point to that very
important post senator mccain not you
with good reason you know that's a tough
question and there's a lot of qualified
americans but i think the first criteria
tom would have to be somebody who
immediately americans identify with
immediately say we can trust that that
individual supporter of senator obama's
is warren buffett
he's already weighed in and helped
stabilize some of the difficulties in
the markets and with companies and
corporations institutions today i like
meg whitman she knows what it's like to
be out there in the in the marketplace
she knows how to create jobs meg whitman
was ceo of a company that started with
12 people and is now 1.3 million people
in america make their living off ebay
maybe somebody here has done a little
business with them but the point is it's
going to have to be somebody who
inspires trust and confidence because
the problem in america today to a large
extent tom is that we don't have trust
and confidence in our institutions
because of the corruption on wall street
and they'll greed and excess and the
cronyism in washington dc all right
senator mccain and senator obama who do
you have in mind for treasury secretary
well warren would be a pretty good
choice warren buffett and i'm pleased to
have his support but there are other
folks out there the key is making sure
that the next treasury secretary
understands that it's not enough just to
help those at the top prosperity is not
just going to trickle down we've got to
help the middle class and and we senator
mccain and i have some fundamental
disagreements on the economy starting
with senator mccain's statement earlier
that he thought the fundamentals of the
economy were sound part of the problem
here is that for many of you wages and
incomes have flatlined for many of you
it is getting harder and harder to save
harder and harder to retire and that's
why for example on tax policy what i
want to do is provide a middle-class tax
cut to 95 percent of working americans
those who are working two jobs people
who are not spending enough time with
their kids because they are struggling
to make ends meet
senator mccain is right that we've got
to stabilize housing prices but
underlying that is loss of jobs and loss
of income that's something that the next
treasurer secretary is gonna have to
work on senator obama thank you very
much may i remind both of you if i can
that we're operating under rules that
you signed off on and when we have a
discussion it really is to be confined
within about a minute or so we're gonna
go now senator mccain to the next
question for you from the hall here and
it comes from oliver clarke who's over
here in section f oliver
well senators through this economic
crisis most of the people that i know
have had a difficult time you know
through this bailout package i was
wondering what is is that's gonna
actually help those people out well
thank you oliver and that's an excellent
question because as you just described
it bail out when i believe that it's
rescued because because of the greed and
acts of excess in washington and wall
street main street was paying a very
heavy price and we know that i left my
campaign and suspended it to go back to
washington to make sure that there were
additional protections for the taxpayer
the form of good oversight in the form
of taxpayers being the first to be paid
back when our economy recovers and it
will recover and a number of other
measures but you know one of the real
really the match that lit this fire was
fannie mae and freddie mac i'll bet you
you may never even have heard of them
before this crisis but you know they're
the ones that with the encouragement of
senator obama and his cronies and his
friends in washington that went out and
made all these risky loans gave them the
people that couldn't never afford to pay
back and you know there were some of us
that stood up two years ago and said
we've got to enact legislation to fix
this we've got to stop this greed in
excess meanwhile the democrats in in the
senate and some and some members of
congress defended what what fannie and
freddie were doing it they said they
resisted any change meanwhile they were
getting all kinds of money in campaign
contributions senator obama was the
highest recipient a fannie mae and
freddie mac money in history in history
so this rescue package means that we
will stabilize markets we will buy and
we will shore up these institutions but
it's not enough that's why we're going
to have to go out into the housing
market and we're gonna have to buy up
these bad loans and we're gonna have to
stabilize house home values and that way
americans can like alan can realize the
american dream and stay in their home
but franny and freddie were the catalyst
the match that started this forest fire
there were some of us there were some of
us that stood up against it there was
others who took a hike
sandra obama well oliver first let me
tell you what's in the rescue package
for you right now the credit markets are
frozen up and what that means as a
practical matter is that small
businesses and some large businesses
just can't get loans if they can't get
along that means that they can't make
payroll if they can't make payroll then
they may end up having to shut their
doors and lay people off and if you
imagine just one company trying to deal
with that now imagine a million
companies all across the country so it
could end up having an adverse effect on
everybody and that's why we had to take
action but we shouldn't have been there
in the first place now i've got to
correct a little bit of senator mccain's
history not surprisingly let's first of
all understand that the biggest problem
in this whole process was the
deregulation of the financial system
senator mccain as recently as march
bragged about the fact that he is ad
regulator on the other hand two years
ago i said that we've got a subprime
lending crisis that has to be dealt with
i wrote to secretary paulson i wrote to
a federal reserve chairman bernanke and
told them this is something we have to
deal with and nobody did anything about
it a year ago i went to wall street and
said we've got to re-regulate and
nothing happened and senator mccain
during that period said that we should
keep on deregulating because that's
now the free enterprise system works now
with respect to fannie mae what senator
mccain didn't mention is the fact that
this bill that he talked about wasn't
his own bill he jumped on it a year
after it been introduced and it never
got passed and i never promoted fannie
mae in fact senator mccain's campaign
chairman's firm was a lobbyist on behalf
of fannie mae not me so but look you're
not interested in hearing politicians
pointing fingers what you're interested
in is trying to figure out how is this
going to impact you this is not the end
of the process this is the beginning of
the process and that's why it's going to
be so important for us to work with
homeowners to make sure that they can
stay in their homes the secretary
already has the power to do that in the
rescue package but it hasn't been
exercised yet and the next president has
to make sure that the next treasury
secretary is thinking about how to
strengthen you as a homebuyer you as a
homeowner and not simply think about
bailing out banks on wall street senator
obama no time for discussion i'm going
to begin with you are you saying to mr
clark and to the other members of the
american television audience if the
american economy is gonna get much worse
before it gets better and they ought to
be prepared for that
no i am confident about the american
economy but we are going to have to have
some leadership from washington that not
only sets out much better regulations
for the financial system the problem is
we still have a archaic 20th century
regulatory system for 21st century
financial markets we're gonna have to
coordinate with other countries to make
sure that whatever actions we take work
but most importantly we're gonna have to
help ordinary families be able to stay
in their homes make sure that they can
pay their bills deal with critical
issues like health care and energy and
we're gonna have to change the culture
in washington so that lobbyists and
special interests aren't driving the
process and your voices aren't being
drowned senator mccain and all candor do
you think the economy is gonna get worse
before it gets better
i think it depends on what we do i think
if we act effectively if we stabilize
the housing market which i believe we
can if we go out and buy up these bad
loans so that people can have
a new mortgage at the new value of their
home i think if we get rid of the
cronyism and special interest influence
in washington so we can act more
effectively my friend i'd like you to
see the letter that a group of senators
and i wrote warning exactly of this
crisis sent obama's name was not on that
letter the point is the point is that we
can fix our economy americans workers
are the best in the world
they're the fundamental aspect of
america's economy they're the most
innovative they're the best but they're
most at best were the best exporters
we're the best importers they're most
effective they are the best workers in
the world and we got to give them a
chance they got it we got to give them a
chance to do their best again and they
are the innocent bystanders here in what
is the biggest financial crisis and
challenge of our time we can do it thank
you senator mccain we're going to
continue over in section f as it turns
out senator obama this is a question
from you from theresa finch to race it
how can we trust either of you with our
money when both parties got got us into
this global economic crisis well look i
understand your frustration and your
cynicism because while you've been
carrying out your responsibilities most
of the people here you've got a family
budget if less money's coming in you end
up making cuts maybe you don't go out to
dinner as much maybe you put off buying
a new car that's not what happens in
washington and you're right there's a
lot of blame to go around but i think
it's important just to remember a little
bit of history when george bush came
into office we had surpluses and now we
have a half a trillion dollar deficit
annually when george bush came into
office our debt national debt was around
five trillion it's now over ten trillion
dollars we've almost doubled it and so
while it's true that nobody's completely
innocent here we have had over the last
eight years the biggest increases in
deficit spending and national debt in
our history and senator mccain voted for
four out of five of those george bush
budgets so here's what i would do i'm
going to spend some money on the key
issues that we've got to work on you
know you may have seen your health care
premiums go up we've got a reform health
care to help you and your budget we are
going to have to deal with energy
because we can't keep on borrowing from
the chinese and sending money to saudi
arabia we are mortgaging our children's
future we've got to have a different
energy plan we've got to invest in
college affordability so we're gonna
have to make some investments but we've
also got to make spending cuts and what
i've proposed you'll hear senator mccain
say well he's proposing a whole bunch of
new spending but actually i am cutting
more than i'm spending so that it will
be a net spending cut the key is whether
or not we've got priorities that are
working for you as opposed to those
who've been dictating policy in
washington lately and that's mostly
lobbyists and special interests we've
got to put an end to that senator mccain
well theresa thank you and i can see why
you feel that cynicism and mistrust
because the system in washington is
broken and i have been a consistent
reformer i have advocated and taken on
the special interest whether they be the
big-money people by reaching across the
aisle and working with senator feingold
on campaign finance reform whether it
being a variety of other issues working
with senator lieberman on trying to
address climate change i have a clear
record of bipartisanship the situation
today cries out for bipartisanship
senator obama has never taken on his
leaders of his party on a single issue
and we need to reform and so let's look
at our records as well as our rhetoric
that's really part of your your mistrust
here and now i suggest that maybe you go
to some of these organizations that are
the watchdog's of what we do
like the citizens against government
waste or the national taxpayers union or
these other organizations that watch us
all the time i don't expect you to watch
every vote and you know what you'll find
this is the most liberal big-spending
record in the united states senate i
have fought against excessive spending
and outrageous i have fought to reduce
the earmarks and eliminate them you know
that senator obama has voted for is
proposing 860 billion dollars of new
spending now new spending do you know
that he voted for every for every
increase in spending that i saw come
across the floor of the united states
senate while we were working to
eliminate these pork barrel earmarks he
voted for nearly a billion dollars in
pork barrel earmark projects including
by the way three million dollars for an
overhead projector at a planetarium in
chicago illinois my friends
do we need to spend that kind of money i
think you have to look at my record and
you have to look at his then you have to
look at our proposals for our economy
not eight hundred and sixty billion
dollars in new spending but for the
kinds of reforms that keep people in
their jobs get middle income americans
working again and getting our economy
moving again you're going to be
examining our proposals tonight and in
the future and energy independence is a
way to do that is one of them and
drilling offshore and nuclear power are
two vital elements of that and i've been
supporting those and i know how to fix
this economy and eliminate our
dependence on foreign oil and stop
sending 700 billion dollars a year
overseas we have this one one minute
discussion period going on here there
are new economic realities out there
that everyone in this hall and across
this country understands that they're
gonna have to be some choices made
health policies energy policies and
entitlement reform
what are your going to be your
priorities in what order which of those
will be your highest priority your first
year in office and which will follow in
sequence again the three priorities were
held it's freeplay health health care
energy and entitlement reform so
security medicare and what order would
you put them in terms of priorities i
think you can work on all three at once
tom i i think it's very important that
we reform our entitlement programs my
friends we are not going to be able to
provide the same benefit for present-day
workers that we are going that
present-day retirees have to today we're
going to have to sit down across the
table republican and democrat as he did
in 1983 between ronald reagan and tip
o'neill i know how to do that i have a
clear record of reaching across the
whether it be joe lieberman or russ
feingold or ted kennedy or others that's
that's my clear record we can we can
work on nuclear power plants build a
whole bunch of them create millions of
new jobs we we have to have all of the
above alternate view alternative fuels
when tied solar natural gas clean coal
technology all of these things we can do
as americans and we can take on this
mission and we can overcome it my friend
some of the 700 billion dollars ends up
in the hands of terrorist organizations
as far as healthcare is concerned
obviously everyone is struggling to make
sure that they can afford their premiums
and that they can have affordable and
available health care that's the next
issue but we can do them all at once
there's no and we have to do them all at
once all three you mentioned are
compelling national security
requirements i'm trying to play by the
rules that you all establish one minute
for discussion senator obama if you
would give us your list of priorities
there are some real questions about
whether everything can be done we're
gonna have to prioritize just like a
family has to prioritize now i've listed
the things that i think have to be at
the top of the list energy we have to
deal with today because you're paying
380 here in nashville for gasoline and
it could go up and it's a strain on your
family budget but it's also bad for our
national security because countries like
russia and venezuela and you know in
some cases countries like iran are
benefiting from higher
so we've got to deal with that right
away that's why i've called for an
investment of 15 billion dollars a year
over 10 years our goal should be in 10
years time we are free of dependence on
middle eastern oil and we can do it now
when jfk said we're going to the moon in
10 years nobody was sure how to do it
but we understood that if the american
people make a decision to do something
it gets done so that would be priority
number one health care is priority
number two because that broken health
care system is bad not only for families
but it's making our businesses less
competitive and number three we've got
to deal with education so that our young
people are competitive in a global
economy but just one point i want to
make time senator mccain mentioned
looking at our records we do need to
look at our records
senator mccain likes to talk about
earmarks a lot and that's important
i want to go line by line through every
item in the federal budget and eliminate
programs that don't work and make sure
that those that do work work better and
cheaper but understand this we also have
to look at where some of our tax
revenues are going so when senator
mccain proposes a 300 billion dollar tax
cut a continuation not only of the bush
tax cuts but an additional 200 billion
dollars that he's going to give to big
corporations including big oil companies
four billion dollars worth that's money
out of the system and so we've got to
prioritize both our spending side and
our tax policies to make sure that
they're working for you that's what i'm
gonna do is president united states
all right gentlemen i want to just
remind you one more time about time
we're gonna have a larger deficit than
the federal government does if we don't
get this under control here before too
long we a senator mccain for you we have
our first question from the internet
tonight a child of the depression 78
year old fiora from chicago since world
war two we have never been asked to
sacrifice anything to help our country
except the blood of our heroic men and
women as president what sacrifices
sacrifices will you ask every american
to make to help restore the american
dream and to get out of the economic
morass that were
lpr i'm gonna ask the american people to
understand that there are some programs
that we may have to eliminate i first
proposed a long time ago that we would
have to examine every agency in every
bureaucracy of government and we're
going to have to eliminate those that
aren't working i know a lot of them that
aren't working one of them is in defense
spending because i've taken on some of
the defense contractors
i saved the taxpayer six point eight
billion dollars in a deal for an air
force tanker that was done in a corrupt
fashion i believe that we have to
eliminate the earmarks and sometimes
those projects not not the overhead
projector that senator obama asked for
but some of them that are really good
projects will have will have to be
eliminated as well and they'll have to
undergo the same scrutiny that all
projects should in competition with
others so we're going to have to tell
the american people that spending is
going to have to be cut in america and i
recommend a spending freeze that except
for defense veterans affairs and some
other vital programs we'll just have to
have across-the-board freeze and some of
those programs may not grow as much as
we would like for them to but we can
establish priorities with full
transparency with full knowledge of the
american people and full consultation
not done behind closed doors and shoving
earmarks in the middle of the night into
programs we don't even sometimes we
don't even know about until months later
and by the way i want to go back a
second look we can attack health care
and energy at the same time we're not
we're not rifle shots here we are
americans we can with the participation
of all americans work together and solve
these problems together frankly i'm not
going to tell that person without health
insurance that i'm sorry you'll have to
wait i'm gonna tell you americans will
get to work right away and we'll get to
work together and we can get them all
done because that's what america has
been doing senator mccain thank you very
much senator obama
you know a lot of you remember the
tragedy of 9/11 and where you were on
that day and you know how all of the
country was ready to come together and
make enormous changes to make us not
only safer but to make us a better
country and in a in a more unified
country and president bush did some
smart things at the outset but one of
the opportunities that was missed was
when he spoke to the american people he
said go out and shop that wasn't the
kind of call to service that i think the
american people were looking for and so
it's important to understand that the i
think the american people are hungry for
the kind of leadership that is going to
tackle these problems not just in
government but outside of government
let's take the example of energy which
we already spoke about there is going to
be the need for each and every one of us
to start thinking about how we use
energy i believe in the need for
increased oil production we're gonna
have to explore new ways to get more oil
and that includes offshore drilling it
includes telling the oil companies that
currently have 68 million acres that
they're not using that either you use
them or you lose them we're gonna have
to develop clean coal technology and a
safe ways to store nuclear energy but
each and every one of us can start
thinking about how can we save energy in
our homes in our buildings and one of
the things i want to do is make sure
that we're providing incentives so that
you can buy a fuel-efficient car that's
made right here in the united states of
america not in japan or south korea
making sure that you are able to
weatherize your home or make your
business more fuel efficient and that's
gonna require effort from each and every
one of us the last point i just want to
make i think the young people of america
are especially interested in how they
can serve and that's one of the reasons
why i'm interested in doubling the peace
corps making sure that we are creating a
volunteer core all
across this country that can be involved
in their community involved in military
service so that military families and
our troops are not the only ones bearing
the burden of renewing america that's
something that all of us have to be
involved with and that requires some
leadership from washington senator obama
as we begin very quickly our discussion
president bush you'll remember last
summer said that wall street got drunk a
lot of people now look back and think
the federal government got drunk and in
fact the americans consumers got drunk
how would you as president try to break
those bad habits of too much debt and
too much easy credit specifically across
the board for this country not just at
the federal level but as a model for the
rest of the country as well well i think
it starts with washington we've got to
show that we've got good habits because
if we're running up trillion-dollar
debts that we're passing on to the next
generation then a lot of people are
gonna think well you know what there's
easy money out there it means and i have
to again repeat this it means that the
spending side but also at the revenue
side i mean senator mccain as as you
know been talking tough about earmarks
and that's good but earmarks account for
about 18 billion dollars of our budget
now when senator mccain is proposing tax
cuts that would give the average fortune
500 ceo an additional seven hundred
thousand dollars in tax cuts that's not
sharing a burden and so part of the
problem i think for a lot of people who
are listening here tonight is they don't
feel as if they are sharing the burden
with other folks i mean you know it's
tough to ask a teacher who's making
thirty or thirty five thousand dollars a
year to tighten her belt when people who
are making much more than her are living
pretty high on the hog and and that's
why i think it's important for the
president to set a tone that says all of
us are going to contribute all of us are
gonna make sacrifices and it means that
yes we may have to cut some spending
although i disagree with senator mccain
about an across-the-board freeze that's
example of an unfair burden sharing
that's using a hatchet to cut the
federal budget i want to use a scalpel
so that people who need help are getting
help and those of us like myself and
senator mccain who don't need help
aren't getting it that's how we make
sure that everybody is willing to make a
few sacrifices
senator mccain right you know nailing
down senator obama's various tax
proposals is like nailing jello to the
wall there's been five or six of them
then if you wait long enough they'll
they'll probably another one but he
wants to raise taxes
my friends the last president to raise
taxes during tough economic times was
herbert hoover any pact practice
protection and protectionism as well
which way i'm sure we'll get to at some
point you know last year up to this time
we've lost 700,000 jobs in america the
only bright spot is that 300 over
300,000 jobs have been created by small
businesses senator obama's secret that
you don't know is that his tax increases
will increase taxes on 50 of small
business revenue small businesses across
america will will have to cut jobs and
will have their taxes increase and won't
be able to hire because of senator
obama's tax policies you know he said
some time ago he said he would forego
his tax increases if the economy was bad
i got some news senator obama the news
is bad so let's not raise anybody's
taxes my friends and make it be very
clear to you i am not in favor of tax
cuts for the wealthy i am in favor of
leaving the tax rates alone and reducing
the tax burden on middle-income
americans by doubling your tax exemption
for every child from $3500 to $7,000 to
giving every american a $5,000
refundable tax credit and go out and get
the health insurance you want rather
than mandates and fines for small
businesses as senator obama's plan calls
for and let's create jobs and let's get
economy going again and let's not raise
anybody's taxes senator obama
we have another question from the
internet can i respond to this briefly
by the two campaigns we work very hard
on this
this will address i think the tax issue
because i think it's very important
there are lots of issues that we're
gonna be dealing with here tonight and
we have a question from langdon in
ballston spa in new york and that's
about huge unfunded obligations for
social security medicare and other
entitlement programs that will soon eat
up all the revenue that's in place and
then go into a deficit position since
the rules are pretty loose here i'm
gonna add my own to this one instead of
having a discussion let me just ask you
as a dakota to that would you give
congress a date certain to reform social
security and medicare within two years
after you take office because in a
bipartisan way everyone agrees that's a
big ticking time bomb that will eat us
up maybe even more than the mortgage
crisis well tom we're gonna have to take
on entitlements and i think we've got to
do it quickly we're gonna have a lot of
work to do so i can't guarantee that
we're gonna do it in the next two years
but i'd like to do it my first term as
president but but i think it's important
understand we're not gonna solve social
security and medicare unless we
understand the rest of our tax policies
and you know the senator mccain i think
you know the straight talk expressed
loss of wheel on that one so let's be
clear about my tax plan and senator
mccain's because we're not gonna be able
to deal with entitlements unless we
understand the revenues coming in i want
to provide a tax cut for 95 percent of
americans 95 percent if you make less
than a quarter million dollars a year
you will not see a single dime of your
taxes go up if you make $200,000 a year
or less your taxes will go down now
senator mccain talks about small
businesses only a few percent of small
businesses make more than $250,000 a
year so the vast majority of small
would get a tax cut under my plan and we
provide a 50 tax credit so that they
can buy health insurance for their
workers because they're an awful lot of
small businesses that i meet all across
america that want to do right by their
workers but they just can't afford it
some small business owners a lot of them
can't even afford health insurance for
themselves now in contrast senator
mccain wants to give a 300 billion
dollar tax cut to 200 of it to the
largest corporations and a hundred
thousand of a hundred billion of it
going to people like ceos on wall street
he wants to give the average fortune 500
ceo an additional seven hundred thousand
dollars in tax cuts that is not fair and
it doesn't work now if we get our tax
policies right so that they're good for
the middle class if we reverse the
policies of the last eight years that
got us into this fix in the first place
and that senator mccain supported then
we are going to be in a position to deal
with social security and deal with
medicare because we will have a health
care plan that actually works for you
reduces spending and costs over the long
term and social security that is stable
and solvent for all americans and not
just some
senator mccain two years for reform of
entitlement i'll answer the question
look it's not that hard to fix social
security tom it's just anti care
decisions i want to get to medicare in a
second social security is not that tough
we know what the problems are my friends
and we know what the fixes are we got to
sit down together across the table it's
been done before
i saw it done with our a wonderful
ronald reagan the conservative from
california and the liberal democrat tip
o'neill from massachusetts that's what
we need more of and that's what i've
done in washington senator obama has
never taken on his party leaders on a
single major issue i've taken him on i'm
not too popular sometimes with my own
party much less his so medicare it's
gonna be a little tougher don't be a
little tougher because we're talking
about very complex and difficult issues
my friends what we have to do with
medicare is have a commission
the smartest people in america come
together come up with recommendations
and then like the base closing
commission idea we had then we should
have congress vote up or down let's not
let them fool with it anymore
there's too much special interests and
too many lobbyists working there so
let's have and let's have the american
people say fix it for us now just back
on this on this tax you know again it's
back to our first question here about
rhetoric and record senator obama has
voted ninety four times to either
increase your taxes or against tax cuts
that's his record when he ran for the
united states senate from illinois he
said he would have a middle income tax
cut you know he came to the senate and
never once proposed legislation to do
that so let's look at our record i've
fought higher taxes i have fought excess
spending i have fought to reform
government let's look at our records my
friends and then listen to my vision for
the future of america
we'll get our economy going again and
our best days are ahead of us senator
mccain thank you very much i'm gonna
stick by my part of the pack and not ask
a follow-up here the next question does
come from the hall for senator mccain it
comes from section c over here and it's
from ingrid jackson
ingrid senator mccain i want to know we
saw that congress move pretty fast in
the face of an economic crisis i want to
know what you would do within the first
two years to make sure that congress
moves fast as far as environmental
issues like climate change and green
jobs well thank you look we are in tough
economic times we all know that and
let's keep never forget
the struggle that americans are in today
but when we can when we have an issue
that we may hand our children and our
grandchildren a damaged planet
i have disagreed strongly with the bush
administration on this issue i traveled
all over the world looking at the
effects of greenhouse gas emissions joe
lieberman and i and i introduced the
first legislation and we forced votes on
it that's a good news my friends
we lost but we kept the debate going and
we kept this issue to posing to
americans the danger that climate change
opposes now how what's what's the best
way of fixing it nuclear power senator
obama says it has to be saved for
disposable or something like that
well i've i was on navy ships that had
nuclear power plants nuclear power is
safe and it's clean and it creates
hundreds of thousands of jobs and and i
know that we can reprocess the spent
nuclear fuel the japanese the british
and the french do it and we can do it
senator obama has opposed that we can
move forward and clean up our climate
and develop green technologies and
alternative and alternative energies for
for hybrid for hydrogen for
battery-powered cars so that we can
clean up our environment and at the same
time get our economy going by creating
millions of jobs we can do that we as
americans because we're the best
innovators were the best producers and
95 of the people who are our market
live outside of the united states of
america senator obama this is one of the
biggest challenges of our times and it
is absolutely critical that we
understand this is not just a challenge
it's an opportunity because if we create
a new energy economy we can create 5
million new jobs easily here in the
united states it can be an engine that
drives us into the future the same way
the computer was the engine for economic
growth over the last couple of decades
and we can do it but we're gonna have to
make an investment the same way the
computer was originally invented by a
bunch of government scientists who are
trying to figure out for defense
purposes how to communicate we've got to
understand this is a national security
issue as well and that's why we've got
to make some investments and i've called
for investments in solar wind geothermal
contrary to what senator mccain keeps on
saying i favor nuclear power as one
component of our overall energy mix
but this is another example where i
think it is important to look at the
record senator mccain and i actually
agree on something he said a while back
that the big problem with energy is that
for 30 years politicians in washington
haven't done anything what senator
mccain doesn't mention is he's been
there 26 of them and during that time he
voted 23 times against alternative fuels
23 times so it's easy to talk about this
stuff during a campaign but it's
important for us to understand that it
requires a sustained effort from the
next president one last point i want to
make on energy
senator mccain talks a lot about
drilling and that's important but we
have 3 of the world's oil reserves and
we use 25 percent of the world's oil so
what that means is that we can't simply
drill our way out of the problem and
we're not going to be able to deal with
the climate crisis if our only solution
is to use more fossil fuels that create
global warming we're gonna have to come
up with alternatives and that means that
the united states government is working
with the private sector to fund the kind
of innovation that we can then export to
countries like china that also need
and are setting up one coal power plant
a week we've got to make sure that we're
giving them the energy that they need or
helping them to create the energy that
they need gentlemen you may not have
noticed but we have lights around here
wave wave like that we're now looking
all right here's a follow-up to that one
minute discussion it's a simple question
sure should we fund a manhattan like
project that developed a nuclear bomb to
deal with global energy and alternative
energy or should we fund a hundred
thousand garages across america the kind
of industry and innovation that
developed silicon valley i think pure
research and development investment on
the part of the united states government
is certainly appropriate i think once it
gets into productive stages that we
to obviously turn it over the private
sector by the way my friend side i know
you grow a little weary this back and
forth it was an energy bill on the floor
of the senate loaded down with goodies
billions for the oil companies and it
was sponsored by bush and cheney you
know who voted for it might never know
that one you know who voted against it
me i have fought a time after time
against these pork barrel these these
these bills that come to the floor and
they have all kinds of goodies and all
kinds of things in them for everybody
and they buy off the votes i vote
against them my friends i vote i vote
against them but the point is also on
oil drilling oil drilling offshore now
is vital so that we can bridge the gap
we can bridge the gap between imported
oil which is which is a national
security issue as well as any other and
it will reduce the price of a barrel of
oil because when people know there's a
greater supply then the cost of that
will go down that's fundamental
economics we've got to drill offshore my
friends and we've got to do it now and
we can do it and as far as nuclear power
is concerned again again look at the
record senator obama has approved
storage and research and reprocessing of
spent nuclear fuel and i'll stop tommy
and you didn't even wait thanks thank
you very much senator next question for
use under obama and it comes from the e
section over here and it's from lindsey
trello lindsay senator selling health
care coverage in america as a market
marketable commodity has become a very
profitable industry do you believe
health care should be treated as a
commodity well you know as i travel
around the country this is one of the
single most frequently asked issues that
i get is the issue of health care it is
breaking family budgets i can't tell you
how many people i meet who don't have
health insurance if you've got health
insurance most of you have seen your
premiums double over the last eight
years and your co-payments and
deductibles have gone up 30 just in
last year alone if you're a small
business it's a crushing burden so one
of the things that i have said from the
start of this campaign is that we have a
moral commitment as well as an economic
imperative to do something about the
healthcare crisis that so many families
are facing so here's what i would do if
you've got healthcare already and
probably the majority of you do then you
can keep your plan if you are satisfied
with it you can keep your choice of
doctor we're gonna work with your
employer to lower the cost of your
premiums by up to $2,500 a year and
we're gonna do it by investing in
prevention we're gonna do it by making
sure that we use information technology
so the medical records are actually on
computers instead of you fill in forms
out in triplicate when you go to the
hospital that will reduce medical errors
and reduce costs if you don't have
health insurance you're gonna be able to
buy the same kind of insurance that
senator mccain and i enjoy as federal
employees because there's a huge pool we
can drop the cost and nobody will be
excluded for pre-existing conditions
which is a huge problem now senator
mccain has a different kind of approach
he says that he's gonna give you a
$5,000 tax credit what he doesn't tell
you is that he is going to tax your
employer based health care benefits for
the first time ever so what one hand
giveth the other hand taketh away he
would also strip away the ability of
states to provide some of the
regulations on insurance companies to
make sure that you're not excluded for
pre-existing conditions or your
mammograms are covered or your maternity
is covered and that is fundamentally the
wrong way to go in fact to just today
business organizations like the united
states chamber of commerce which
generally are pretty supportive of
republicans said that this would lead to
the unraveling of the employer based
health care system that i don't think is
the kind of change that we need we've
got to have somebody who's fighting for
patients and making sure that you get
decent affordable health care and that's
something that i'm committed to doing as
president senator mccain well thank you
for the question you you you really
identify one of the really major
challenges at america
as copayments go up cost go up
skyrocketing costs which make people
less and less able to afford health
insurance in america
and we need to do all of the things that
are necessary to make it more efficient
let's put health records online that
will reduce medical errors as as they
call them
let's have community health centers
let's have walk-in clinics let's do a
lot of things to impose efficiencies but
what is at stake here in this health
care issue is the fundamental difference
between myself and senator obama as you
notice he starts talking about
government he starts that government
will do this and government will do that
and then government will and he'll
impose mandates if you're a small
business person and you don't insure
your employees senator obama will find
you will find you that's remarkable if
you're a parent and you're struggling to
get health insurance for your children
senator obama will find you i want to
give every american a $5,000 refundable
tax credit they can take anywhere across
state lines why not don't we go across
state lines when we purchase other
things in america of course it's okay to
go across state lines because in arizona
they may offer a better plan that suits
you best
then it does here in tennessee and if
you do the math those people who have
employer-based health benefits if you
put the tax on it and you have what's
left over and you add $5,000 that you're
gonna get as a refundable tax credit do
the math 95 of the american people will
have increased funds to go out and buy
the insurance of their choice and to
shop around and to get all those people
will be covered except for those who
have these gold-plated cadillac kinds of
policies you know like hair transplants
i might need one of those myself but the
point is that we have got to give people
choice in america and not mandate things
on them and give them the ability every
parent i know would acquire health
insurance for their children if they
obviously small-business people want to
give their employees health insurance of
course they all want to do that we've
got a given the wherewithal to do it we
can do it by giving them as a start a
$5,000 refundable tax credit to go
around and get the health insurance
policy of their choice quick discussion
is health care in america a privilege or
right or responsibility senator mccain i
think it's a responsibility in this
respect in that we should have available
and affordable health care to every
american citizen to every family member
and with the plan that that i have that
will do that but government mandates i
i'm always a little nervous about it but
it is certainly my responsibility to
certainly small business people and
others and they understand that
responsibility american citizens
understand that employers understand
that but they certainly are a little
nervous when senator obama says if you
don't get the health care policy that i
think you should have that you're going
to get fined and by the way senator
obama's never mentioned how much that
fine might be perhaps we might find that
out tonight
well why don't we talk about this time
because there was just a lot of stuff
out there
perfect right responsibility i think it
should be a right for every american in
a country as wealthy as ours for us to
have people who are going bankrupt
because they can't pay their medical
bills from my mother to die of cancer at
the age of 53 and have to spend the last
months of her life in the hospital room
arguing with insurance companies because
they're saying that this may be a
pre-existing condition and they don't
have to pay her treatment there's
something fundamentally wrong about that
so let me let me just talk about this
fundamental difference and tom i know
that we're on under time constraints but
senator mccain threw a lot of stuff out
there number one let me just repeat if
you've got a health care plan that you
like you can keep it all i'm gonna do is
help you to lower the premiums on it
you'll still have choice of doctor
there's no mandate involved small
businesses are not going to have a
mandate what we're gonna give you is a
50 tax credit to help provide health
for those that you need now it's true
that i say that you are gonna have to
make sure that your child has health
care because children are relatively
cheap to insure and we don't want them
going to the emergency room for
treatable illnesses like asthma and when
senator mccain says that he wants to
provide children health care what he
doesn't mention is he voted against the
expansion of the children's health
insurance program that is responsible
for making sure that so many children
who didn't have previously health
insurance have it now now the final
point i'll make is on this whole issue
of government intrusion and mandates it
is absolutely true that i think it is
important for government to crack down
on insurance companies that are cheating
their customers that don't give you the
fine print so you end up thinking that
you're paying for something and when you
finally get sick and you need it you're
not getting it and the reason that it's
a problem to go shopping state-by-state
you know what insurance companies will
do they will find a state maybe arizona
maybe another state where there are no
requirements for you to get cancer
screenings where there are no
requirements for you to have to get
pre-existing conditions and they will
all set up shop there that's how in
banking it works everybody goes to
delaware because they've got very pretty
loose laws when it comes to things like
credit cards and in that situation what
happens is is that the protections you
have for the consumer protections that
you need you're not gonna have available
to you that is a fundamental difference
that i have with senator mccain he
believes in deregulation in every
circumstance that's what we've been
going through for the last eight years
it hasn't worked and we need fundamental
change senator we want to move on now we
come back to the hall here we're gonna
shift gears here a little bit and we're
gonna go to foreign policy and
international matters if we leave that
did we hear the size of the fine phil
elliot is over here in this section and
phil elliot has a question for senator
mccain so yes senator mccain how will
all the recent economic stress affect
our nation's ability to act
as a peacemaker in the world well i
thank you for that question because
there's no doubt it history shows us
that nations that are strong militarily
over time have to have a strong economy
as well and that is one of the
challenges that america faces but having
said that america and we'll hear a lot
of criticism have heard a lot of
criticism about america and our national
security policy and all that and much of
that criticism is justified but the fact
is america is the greatest force for
good in the history of the world my
friends we have gone to all four corners
of the earth and shed american blood in
defense usually if somebody else's
freedom in our own so we are peacemakers
and we're peacekeepers
but the challenge is is to know when the
united states of america can
beneficially affect the outcome of a of
a crisis when to go in and win not when
american military power is worth the
expenditure of our most precious
treasure and that question has can only
be answered with someone with a
knowledge and experience and the
judgment the judgment to know when our
national security is not only at risk
but where the united states of america
can make a difference in preventing
genocide in preventing the spread of
terrorism in doing the things that the
united states has done not always well
but we've done because we're a nation of
good and i am convinced that my record
going back to my opposition from sending
the marines to lebanon to supporting our
efforts in kosovo and bosnia and the
first gulf war and my judgment i think
is something that i'm a record that i'm
willing to stand on senator obama was
wrong about iraq in the surge he was
wrong about russia when they committed
aggression against georgia and in his
short career he does not understand our
national security challenges we don't
have time for on-the-job training my
friend senator obama the economic
constraints on the us military action
are on
well you know senator mccain in last
debate and today again suggested that i
don't understand it's true there's some
things i don't understand i don't
understand how we ended up invading a
country that had nothing to do with 9/11
while osama bin laden and al qaeda are
setting up base camps and safe havens to
train terrorists to attack us that was
senator mccain's judgment and it was the
wrong judgment when senator mccain was
cheerleading the president to go into
iraq he suggests it was going to be
quick and easy we'd be greeted as
liberators that was the wrong judgment
and it's been costly to us so one of the
difficulties with iraq is that it has
put an enormous strain first of all on
our troops obviously and they have
performed heroically and honorably and
we owe them an extraordinary debt of
gratitude but it's also put an enormous
strain on our budget we've spent so far
close to seven hundred billion dollars
and if we continue on the path that
we're on as senator mccain is suggesting
it's gonna go well over a trillion
dollars we're spending ten billion
dollars a month in iraq at a time when
the iraqis have a seventy nine billion
dollar surplus seventy nine billion
dollars and and we need that ten billion
dollars a month here in the united
states to put people back to work to do
all these wonderful things that senator
mccain suggested we should be doing but
has not yet explained how he would pay
for now senator mccain and i do agree
this is the greatest nation on earth we
are a full force of good in the world
but there has never been a nation in the
history of the world that saw its
economy decline and maintained its
military superiority and the strains
that have been placed on our alliances
around the world and the respect that's
been diminished over the last eight
years has constrained us in able to act
on something like the genocide in darfur
because we don't have the resources or
the allies to do everything that we
should be doing
that's gonna change when i'm president
but we can't change it unless we
fundamentally change senator mccain's
and george bush's foreign policy it has
not worked for america senator obama let
me ask you if see if we can establish
tonight the obama doctrine and the
mccain doctrine for the use of united
states combat forces in situations where
there's a humanitarian crisis but it
does not affect our national security
take the congo where four and a half
million people have died since 1998 or
take rwanda in the earlier and dreadful
days or somalia what is the obama
doctrine for use of force that the
united states would send when we don't
have national security issues at stake
well we may not always have national
security issues at stake but we have
moral issues at stake if we could have
intervened effectively in the holocaust
who among us would say that we had a
moral obligation not to go in if we
could have stopped rwanda surely if we
had the ability that would be something
that we would have to strongly consider
and act so you know when genocide is
happening when ethnic cleansing is
happening somewhere around the world and
we stand idly by that diminishes us and
so i do believe that we have to consider
it as part of our interests our national
interests in intervening where possible
but understand that there's a lot of
cruelty around the world we're not going
to be able to be everywhere all the time
that's why it's so important for us to
be able to work in concert with our
allies let's take the example of darfur
just for a moment right now there is a
peace force that has been set up and we
have african union troops in darfur to
stop a genocide that has killed hundreds
of thousands of people we could be
providing logistical support setting up
a no-fly zone at relatively little cost
to us but we can only do it if we can
help mobilize the international
community and lead and that's what i
intend to do when i'm president senator
mccain mccain doctrine if you will well
let me just follow up my friends
if we had done what senator obama wanted
done in iraq and that was set a date for
withdrawal with general petraeus our
chief was chairman and our joint chiefs
of staff said would be very dangerous
course to take for america then we would
have had a wider war we would have been
back iranian influence would have
increased al qaeda would have
re-established a base there was a lot at
stake there my friends and i can tell
you right now that senator obama would
have brought our troops home in defeat
i'll bring him home with victory and
with honor and that is a fundamental
difference the united states of america
tom is the greatest force for good as i
said and we must do whatever we can to
prevent genocide whatever we can to
prevent these terrible calamities that
we have said never again but it also has
to be tempered with our ability to
beneficially affect the situation that
requires a cool hand at the tiller this
requires a person who understands what
are the limits of our capability are we
went in to somalia as a peacemaking
organization we ended up trying to be
excuse me as peacekeeping organization
we ended up trying to be peace makers
and we ended up having to withdraw in
humiliation in lebanon i stood up the
present reagan my hero and said if we
send marines in there well how can we
possibly beneficially affect this
situation and said we shouldn't
unfortunately almost 300 brave young
marines were killed so you have to
temper your decisions with the ability
to beneficially affect the situation and
realize you're sending america's most
precious asset american blood into
harm's way and again i know those
situations i've been in them all my life
and i can tell you right now they
security of your young men and women who
are serving in the military are my first
priority right after our nation's
security and i may have to make those
tough decisions but i won't take them
lightly and i understand that we have to
say never again to a holocaust and never
to rwanda but we also better be darn
sure we don't leave and make the
situation worse thereby exacerbating our
reputation and our ability to address
crises in other parts of the world thank
you very much next question for senator
obama it comes from the f section and
it's from kati am katie should the
united states respect pakistani
sovereignty and not pursue al-qaeda
terrorists who maintain bases there or
should we ignore their borders and
pursue our enemies like we did in
cambodia during the vietnam war katie
it's a terrific question and we have a
difficult situation in pakistan i
believe that part of the reason we have
a difficult situation is because we made
a bad judgment going into iraq in the
first place when we hadn't finished the
job of hunting down bin laden and
crushing al-qaeda so what happened was
we got distracted we diverted resources
and ultimately bin laden escaped set up
base camps in the mountains of pakistan
in the northwest provinces there they
are now raiding our troops in
afghanistan destabilizing the situation
they're stronger now than at any time
since 2001 and that's why i think it's
so important for us to reverse course
because that's the central front on
terrorism they are plotting to kill
americans right now as the secretary
great gates the defense secretary said
the war against terrorism began in that
region and that's where it will end so
part of the reason i think it's so
important for us to end the war in iraq
is to be able to get more troops in
afghanistan put more pressure on the
afghan government to do what it needs to
do eliminate some of the drug
trafficking that's funding terrorism but
i do believe that we have to change our
policies with pakistan we can't coddle
as we did a dictator give him billions
of dollars and then he's making peace
treaties with the taliban and militants
what i've said is we're gonna encourage
democracy in pakistan
expand our non military aid
to pakistan so that they have more of a
stake in working with us but insisting
that they go after these militants and
if we have osama bin laden in our sights
and the pakistani government is unable
or unwilling to take them out then i
think that we have to act and we will
take them out we will kill bin laden we
will crush al-qaeda that has to be our
biggest national security priority
senator mccain kt thank you you know my
hero is a guy named teddy roosevelt
teddy roosevelt used to say walk softly
talk softly but carry a big stick
senator obama likes to talk loudly in
fact he said he wants to announce that
he's going to attack pakistan remarkable
you know if you are if you are a country
and you're trying to gain the support of
another country then you want to do
everything you can that they would act
in a cooperative fashion when you
announce that you're going to launch an
attack into another country it's pretty
obvious that you have the effect that it
had in pakistan it turns public opinion
against us now let me just go back with
you very briefly we drove the russians
out with the afghan freedom fighters
drove the russians out of afghanistan
and then we made his most serious
mistake we washed our hands of
afghanistan the taliban came back in
al-qaeda and we then had the situation
that required us to conduct the afghan
war now our relations with pakistan are
critical because the border areas are
being used as safe havens by the taliban
and al qaeda and other extremist
organizations and we have to get their
support now general petraeus had a
strategy the same strategy varying with
very different because of the conditions
and the situation but the same
fundamental strategy that succeeded in
iraq and that is to get the support of
the people we need to help the pakistani
government go into a zero stand where i
visited a very rough
country and and get the support of the
people and get them to work with us and
turn against the cruel taliban and
others and and by working and
coordinating our efforts together not
threatening to attack them but working
with them and where necessary use force
but talk softly but carry a big stick
just a quick follow-up on this i think
if we're gonna have follow-ups and i
will want just a quick follow-up because
i think i think this is important i'm
just i hired healthcare so i meant
you're doing a great job huh
look i want to be very clear about what
i said nobody called for the invasion of
pakistan senator mccain continues to
repeat this what i said was the same
thing that the audience here today heard
me say which is if pakistan is unable or
unwilling to hunt down bin laden and
take him out then we should now that i
think has to be our policy because they
are threatening to kill more americans
now senator mccain suggests that somehow
you know i'm green behind the ears and
you know i've just spouting off and he's
somber and responsible i thank senator
mccain this is the guy who sang bomb
bomb bomb iran who called for the
annihilation of north korea that i don't
think is an example of speaking softly
this is the person who after we had we
hadn't even finished afghanistan where
he said
next up baghdad so i agree that we have
to speak responsibly and we have to act
responsibly in the reason pakistan the
the popular opinion of america had
diminished in pakistan was because we
were supporting a dictator musharraf had
given him set a 10 billion dollars over
seven years and he had suspended civil
liberties we were not promoting
democracy this is the kind of policies
ultimately end up undermining our
ability to fight the war on terrorism
and it will change when i'm president at
tom and fear if we're gonna go back and
forth i then i'd like to have equal time
to go to respond then we have to move on
not true not true i have obviously
supported those efforts that the united
states had to go in militarily and i
have opposed those that i didn't think
so i understand what it's like to send
young americans in harm's way i say i
was joking with a veteran i hate to even
go into this i was joking with an old
veteran friend who joked with me about
iran but the point is that i know how to
handle these these these crises and
senator obama by saying that he would
attack pakistan look at the context of
his words
i'll get osama bin laden my friends i'll
get him i know how to get it i'll get
no matter what and i know how to do it
but i'm not going to telegraph my
punches which is what senator obama did
and i'm gonna act responsibly as i have
acted responsibly throughout my military
career and throughout my career in the
united states senate and we have
fundamental disagreements about the use
of military power and how you do it and
you just saw it in response to previous
questions can i get a quick response
from the two of you about developments
in afghanistan this week's a senior
british military commander who is now
leaving after a second tour and their
senior diplomatic presence there sherrod
cooper coles who is well known as an
expert in the area both have said that
we're failing in afghanistan the
commander said we cannot win there we've
got to get it down to a low level
insurgency let the afghans take it over
cooper cole said what we need is an
acceptable dictator if either of you
becomes president as one of you will how
do you reorganize afghanistan strategy
or do you briefly if you can i'll be
very brief we are going to have to make
the iraqi government start taking more
responsibility withdraw our troops in a
responsible way over time because we're
gonna have to put some
additional troops in afghanistan general
mckiernan the the commander in
afghanistan right now is desperate for
more help because our bases and outposts
are now targets for more aggressive
afghan or taliban offensives we're also
gonna have to work with the karzai
government and what i met with president
karzai was very clear that you are going
to have to do better by your people in
order for us to gain the popular support
that's necessary i don't think he has to
be a dictator we want a democracy in
afghanistan but we have to have a
government that is responsive to the
afghan people and frankly it's just not
responsive right now senator mccain
briefly general petraeus has just taken
over a position of responsibility where
he has the command and will really set
the tone for the strategy and tactics
that are using i've had conversations
with him it is the same overall strategy
of course we have to do some things
tactically some of which senator obama
is is correct on we have to double the
size the afghan army we have to have a
streamlined nato command structure we
have to do a lot of things we have to
work much more closely with the
pakistanis but most importantly we have
to have the same strategy which senator
obama said wouldn't work couldn't work
still fails to admit that he was wrong
about iraq he we will still will not
admit that he was wrong about the
strategy of the surge in iraq and and
that's the same kind of strategy of go
out and secure and hold and allow people
to live normal lives and once they feel
then they lead normal social economic
political lives the same thing that's
happening in iraq today so i have
confidence that general petraeus working
with the pakistanis working with the
afghans doing the same job that he did
in iraq will again we will succeed and
we will bring our troops home with honor
and victory and not in defeat senator
cain this question is for you from the
internet is from alden and you
sexist how can we apply pressure to
russia for humanitarian issues in an
effective manner without starting
another cold war first of all i say i
don't think we're not going to have
another cold war with with russia but
have no doubt that russia's behavior is
certainly outside the norms of behavior
that we would expect for nations which
are very wealthy as russia has become
because of their petrol dollars now long
ago i warned about vladimir putin i said
i looked into his eyes and saw three
letters a kag
and a bee he has surrounded himself with
former kgb apparatchiks he has gradually
repressed most of the liberties that we
would expect for nations to observe and
he has exhibited most aggressive
obviously in georgia said before watch
ukraine ukraine right now is in the
sights of vladimir putin those that want
to reassemble the old soviet union we've
got to show moral support for georgia
we've got to show moral support for
ukraine we've got to advocate for their
membership in nato we have to make the
russians understand that there are
penalties for this kind of behavior this
kind of naked aggression into georgia a
tiny country in a tiny tiny democracy
and so of course we want to bring
international pressures to bear on
russia in hopes that that will modify
and eventually change their behavior
now the g8 is one of those but there are
many others but the russians must
understand that these kinds of actions
and activities are not acceptable and
hopefully we will use the leverage
economic diplomatic and others have
united with our allies with our allies
and friends in europe who are equally
disturbed as we are about their recent
behaviors senator obama not be a
reignite the cold war but russia is a
challenge senator obama we're winding
down so if we can keep track of the time
the resurgence of russia is one of the
central issues that we're going to have
to deal with for the in the next
presidency and for the most part i agree
with senator mccain on many of the steps
that have to be taken but we can't just
provide moral support we've got to
provide moral support to the polls in
estonia and latvia and all the nations
that were former soviet satellites but
we've also got to provide them with
financial and concrete assistance to
help rebuild their economies at georgia
in particular is now think of enormous
economic challenges and some say that
that's what putin intended in the first
place the other thing we have to do
though is we've got to see around the
corners we've got to anticipate some of
these problems ahead of time you know
back in april i put out a statement
saying that the situation in georgia was
unsustainable because you had russian
peacekeepers in these territories that
were under dispute and you knew that if
the russians themselves what were trying
to obtain some of these territories or
push back against georgia that that was
not a stable situation so part of the
job of the next commander-in-chief in
keeping all of you safe is making sure
that we can see some of the 21st century
challenges and anticipate them before
they happen we haven't been doing enough
of that we tend to be reactive that's
what we've been doing over the last
eight years and that has actually made
us more safe that's part of what
happened in afghanistan where we rushed
into iraq and senator mccain and
president bush suggested that it wasn't
that important to catch bin laden right
now and that we could muddle through and
that has cost us dearly we've got to be
much more strategic if we're going to be
able to deal with all the challenges
that we face out there and one last
point i want to make about russia energy
is going to be key in dealing with
russia if we can reduce our energy
consumption that reduces the amount of
petrol dollars that they have that to
make mischief around the world that was
in us and weakened them when it comes to
issues like georgia this requires only a
yes or a no ronald reagan famously said
that the soviet union was the evil
empire do you think that russia under
vladimir putin is an evil empire
i think they've engaged in an evil
behavior and i think that it is
important that we understand they're not
the old soviet union but they still have
nationalist you know the impulses that i
think are very dangerous
senator mccain and maybe depends on how
we respond to to russia and depends on a
lot of things if i say yes then that
means that we're reading the old cold
war if i say no it ignores their
behavior obviously energy is going to be
a big big factor and georgia and ukraine
are both major gateways of energy into
europe and that's one of the reasons why
it's in our interest but the russians i
think i think we can deal with them but
they got to understand that they're
facing a very firm and determined united
states of america that will defend our
interests in that of other countries in
the world all right we're gonna try to
get into more questions to click in so
we have to move on over in such an a
terry sherry i have that right terry
senator as a retired navy chief my
thoughts are off who those who serve our
country i know both candidates both of
you expressed support for israel if
despite your best diplomatic efforts
iran attacks israel would you be willing
to commit us troops in support in
defense of israel or would you wait on
approval from the un security council
well thank you terry and thank you for
your service to the country i want to
say everything i ever learned about
leadership i learned from a chief petty
officer and i thank you and i thank you
my friend thanks for serving let me say
that we obviously would not wait for the
united nations security council
i think the realities are that both
russia and china
would probably pose significant
obstacles and our challenge right now is
the iranians continue on the path to
acquiring nuclear weapons and it's a
great threat it's not just a threat
threat to the state of israel it's a
threat to the stability of the entire
middle east if iran acquires nuclear
weapons all the other countries will
acquire them the tensions will be
ratcheted up what would you do if you
were the israelis and the president of a
country says that they are they are
determined to wipe you off the map cause
your country a stinking corpse now
senator obama without precondition wants
to sit down and negotiate with them
without preconditions that's what he
stated again a matter of record i want
to make sure that the iranians are put
enough that we put enough pressure on
the iranians by joining with our allies
imposing significant tough sanctions to
modify their behavior and i think we can
do that i think joining with our allies
and friends in a league of democracies
that we can effectively abridge their
behavior and hopefully they would
abandon this quest that they are on for
nuclear weapons but at the end of the
day my friend i have to tell you again
and you know what it's like to serve and
you know what it's like to sacrifice but
we can never allow a second holocaust to
take place senator obama
well terry first of all we honor your
service and we're grateful for it we
cannot allow iran to get a nuclear
weapon it would be a game-changer in the
region not only would it threaten israel
our strongest ally in the region and one
of our strongest allies in the world but
it would also create a possibility of
nuclear weapons falling into the hands
of terrorists so it's unacceptable and i
will do everything that's required to
prevent it and we will never take
military options off the table and it is
important that we don't provide veto
to the united nations or anyone else in
acting in our interests it is important
though for us to use all the tools at
our disposal to prevent the scenario
where we've got to make those kinds of
choices and that's why i have
consistently said that if we can work
more effectively with other countries
diplomatically to tighten sanctions on
iran if we can reduce our energy
consumption through alternative energy
so that iran has less money if we can
impose the kinds of sanctions that say
for example iran right now imports
gasoline even though it's an oil
producer because it's oil infrastructure
has broken down if we can prevent them
from importing the gasoline that they
need in the refined petroleum products
that starts changing their cost-benefit
analysis that starts putting the squeeze
on them now it is true though that i
believe that we should have direct talks
not just with our friends but also with
our enemies to deliver a tough direct
message to iran that if you don't change
your behavior then there will be dire
consequences if you do change your
behavior then it is possible for you to
rejoin the community of nations now it
may not work but one of the things we've
learned is is that when we take that
approach whether it's in north korea or
in iran then we have a better chance at
better outcomes when president bush
decided we're not gonna talk to a rom
we're not gonna talk to north korea you
know what happened iran went from zero
centrifuges to develop nuclear weapons
to 4,000 north korea quadrupled its
nuclear capability we've got to try to
have talks understanding that we're not
taking military options all right
gentlemen we've come to the last
question and you'll both be interested
to know this comes from the internet and
it's from a state that you're strongly
contesting both of you is from peggy and
amherst new hampshire it has a certain
zen-like quality how give you a fair
warning she says what don't you know
and how will you learn it
senator obama you get first crack at
my wife michelle is there and she could
give you a much longer list than i do
and most of the time i learned it by
asking her but look the nature of the
challenge is that we're gonna face are
immense and one of the things that we
know about the presidency is that it's
never the challenges that you expect
it's the challenges that you don't that
end up consuming most of your time but
here's what i do know i know that i
wouldn't be standing here if it weren't
for the fact that this country gave me
opportunity you know i came from very
modest means i had a single mom and my
grandparents raised me and it was
because of the help of scholarships and
and my grandmother scrimping on things
that you know she might have wanted to
purchase and and my mom at one point
getting food stamps in order for us to
put food on the table despite all that i
was able to go to the best schools on
earth i was able to succeed in a way
that i could not have succeeded anywhere
else in this country the same is true
for michelle and i'm sure the same is
true for a lot of you and the question
in this election is are we gonna pass on
that same american dream to the next
generation over the last eight years
we've seen that dream diminish wages and
incomes have gone down people have lost
their health care or going bankrupt
because they get sick we've got young
people who've got the grades and the
will and the drive to go to college but
they just don't have the money and we
can't expect that if we do the same
things that we've been doing over the
last eight years that somehow we are
going to have a different outcome we
need fundamental change that's what's at
stake in this election that's the reason
i decided to run for president and i'm
hopeful that all of you are prepared to
continue this extraordinary journey that
we call america but we're gonna have to
have the courage and the sacrifice the
nerve to move in a new direction
thank you senator can you get the last
word senator obama have the opening
you're laughs up well thank you tom and
i think what i don't know is what all of
us don't know and that's what's going to
happen both here at home and abroad the
challenges that we face are
unprecedented americans are hurting
tonight in a way they have not in our
generation there are challenges around
the world that are new and different and
there will be different we will be
talking about countries sometime in the
future that we hardly know where they
are on the map some americans so what i
don't know is what the unexpected will
be but i have spent my whole life
serving this country i grew up in a
family where my father was gone most of
the time because he was at sea and doing
our country's business my mother
basically raised our family i know what
it's like in dark times i know it's it's
like to have to fight to keep one's hope
going through difficult times i know
what it's time what it's like to rely on
others for support and courage and love
in tough times i know what it's like to
have your comrades reach out to you and
your neighbors and your fellow citizens
and pick you up and put you back in the
fight that's what america is all about i
believe in this country i believe in its
future i believe in its greatness it's
been my great honor to serve it for many
many years and i'm asking the american
people to give me another opportunity
and i'll rest on my record but i also
tell you and times are tough we need
steady handed the tiller and the great
honor of my life was to always put my
country first thank you tom
thank you very much senator mccain that
concludes tonight's debate from here in
nashville we want to thank our hosts
here at belmont university in nashville
and the commission on presidential
debates and you're in my way of my
script there if you will
in addition to everything else there is
one more presidential debate on
wednesday october 15th at hofstra
university in new york moderated by my
friend bob schieffer of cbs news thank
you senator mccain thank you senator
obama good night everyone from nashville